Vice President of the University of Texas at
Dallas by Brenda Nolte on May 3, 1990. This is being
recorded over the phone concerning the feminist
movement. In interest of accumulating
knowledge, I'm asking you to donate this tape to me
or to the tape or to the Texas A&M Oral History
Collection in the University Archives. Is that
all right with you? That's fine. Okay. What's the
date and place of your birth? July 27, 1941, in
Ranger, Texas. Who was a big influence to you as a
child, right at the moment? Yes, several of them.
Both of my grandmothers,
I think, were important in my life. I had an aunt
that was... 10 years older than I am and 10 years
younger than my mother. And she was the first
college graduate
on that side of
the field
and was the student leader at Baylor and was an
airline stewardess for American Airlines in like
1964 or something like that. And so she never
married and was an independent
And I had a
high school home
economics teacher that encouraged me to look at
leadership positions. And my mother always
pushed me to do things, although some of them were
quite traditional. She always wanted me to have
opportunities. And
then I was
a great reader of biographies. I worked in the
library as a child. And I read the Bob Holmes
series.
What
degrees did you receive in undergraduate and
graduate school? Well, I have a very
disjointed educational path, which may be
untrue. We were encouraged
to do these very traditional
type
degrees, and I have three undergraduate degrees,
one in economics, one in art education, and one in
applied art, and I have a minor in science, and I
have a master's in art education, and a master's in
liberal arts, and a doctorate in administration.
Why did you receive a doctorate degree? Where?
Yeah, why and where? What was the purpose of it? I
got it because my other degree didn't allow me to do
the things I wanted to do. And so I either had a
choice of getting an MBA. I had taken a lot of
research courses, seminars, and done a lot of
leadership training.
What
was life like for a woman at the time you were in
college? College college?
Well, we had a 10 o'clock curfew. I was the one
who called the
board and said, this is the board for Hope and Dean,
and this is my boyfriend. To whom I am now married
to. Started going with my sophomore high school.
You did not wear pants and flats. You didn't wear
dressings. You were not encouraged to use your
shoes. Well, there were a lot of classes in the
girls' class. were
not able
to be admitted to
the college. My daughter Renee is a man in Texas
A&M. It was even questionable for girls to take
life drawing and art life. It was very late. It was
fairly... restrictive and a lot of girls started
college
with the idea that their goal was really to get
married, not necessarily to get married. And
particularly I think in the South, in the small
towns, that was kind of the norm rather than the
exception. And many, most of my high school What
type of
organizations were you part of concerning the
women's issue? In college? For both, for college
and then later on. There
weren't
any in college, particularly, although I held a
high school. I was a state officer and teacher,
homeowner for the man, which I think was very good
because he was trained to do home economics, was
the only school in Texas Tech that had a CMLD. And so
there were good role models in CMA, although very
traditional. And I didn't get active in CMA.
As
far as the formal organization, I joined the
National Organization for Women, but I joined the
local organization called Women for Change, and
out of that group grew the Women's Center of
Dallas, and I served as president of that
organization in 1979-1976. That group was
tailored to me
the
deeds of feminists in Dallas and started things
like the Great Crisis and later it was raised the
issue of violence in the family and started things
later on there in training with the police during
the Dallas Women's Credit Union. Took on a lot of
those kinds of things
I've
worked closely with the Planned Parenthood on a
lot of issues that women were raising. And when I
was on that panel, Equal Access to Education, and
there was an act called the Title IX, an amendment
to the Education Act of 1972, and I worked actively
to get that legislation aid passed and then
implemented not only in Dallas but across the
country. Did you involved in the Women's National
Convention in Houston in 1977? Yes. As a matter of
fact, I attended. I didn't have a leadership role
then. It was fascinating. About six of us piled in a
car in Dallas and drove to that convention. It was
very interesting.
Gloria
Steinem came about that same year to Dallas, and we
hosted her as the women's center. I had a private
thing, a couple of private things for her. And the
Women's Composing Committee, which now
celebrates its 25th year, was a catalyst for many
of these kinds of activities here in Dallas.
What was the atmosphere like at the convention?
Exciting. Yeah. Very upbeat, all new, kind of
scary because rumors were that the Ku Klux Klan was
going to pick it, and sure enough they did, but not
any huge numbers. It was really fun, and it was my
first political conference. What's
your
view on EPA and should it be passed?
EPA or ERA? Oh, sorry, ERA. I'm sorry, ERA. EPA is
environmental protection. Sorry about that,
ERA. Well, I don't know. shame
that we still are not legally part of the
Constitution as we should have had in Texas, as a
matter of fact, because I think the fourth state in
the union has ERAs in them, and that is one of the
reasons that gave legal emphasis to Roseburg and
the Way growing up in Texas. Women have always been
very
independent. They had to be survived,
just to move with, which is one of the reasons I
always had a great admire of my grandmother's
face. In very traditional roles, were very
independent women, out of possession. They say,
the place they birthed the babies, they grew the
food, they built the homes. Really, women were
or
the basics to reason the frontier was settled and
civilized. So it took quite a long time. The ERA
passed in Texas, and there is a state ERA, still in
Texas, which has given the company some legal,
legal address, ways to address problems.
How do
you
feel about the abortion
issue? that
no one should tell a woman what to do, what happens
with her own body, and that everybody should have a
right to decide whether or not they are prepared
for those responsibilities here. And if
reporting is last resort or anything, What were
the general feelings of women after Roe v. Wade?
Were they surprised that it passed through the
Supreme Court? I think it's the time.
we
had think that that finally the country was
working quite enough it was part of the whole heady
era of the time that the right to be in central was
raised. I think they had think that was part of the
whole country coming of age. It was more of a shock
that that right should be placed.
Do
you feel like
in the 70s that women had
equal opportunity in the classroom as well as in
sports? Had it improved since the time you were in
high school? No, it hadn't changed very much at
all. I think with the advent
of Title IX,
there's been a lot of progress. When I started
teaching students in Dallas in the early 60s and
80s, lots of places were not available, shop
places.
I
think a lot of the old-time teachers are not
prepared for the whole issue of women's
administration and should women be involved in
it? Would men work for women? Would women be really
good in the college and kind of manage the school
and all those work issues? were
dealt with in a relatively short time period.
Title IX began in the mid-1930s in St. Mary,
Ravensburg. In a five or six year period, I think
there were some dramatic changes as far as girls
back then.
Have men liberated as quickly in this country as
women?
Do you think they're catching up now, or was there a
big battle against? Well, I think in many cases
backlash, and they are accepting, I think, the
changes quickly because of the economic reality.
Some of them have working lives. Very few families
have survived today, you know, income.
But
women, unfortunately, still have two primary
jobs. They're outside of the country. I think
statistics show, over and over, studies show that
men are on nearly the same number of hours of work as
women. I think there seems to be a change among
younger men.
Has
the general view towards women changed? Is it
liberated? An example would be Sports
Illustrated's some suit issue, the popularity
of, oh, The
old theory
of consciousness, the fact that women still are
judged in this much older look than anything else,
and the fact that many women who are highly
susceptible, married, And
I think it's because economically, it goes back to
economically, merchants depend on what they have
there on the street.
When
the wife gets into a position where she has an
opportunity to move to fix her career, the old norm
often comes back into play. That's where the
rubber
A
lot of jobs where a number of women have taken over
the job in
some ways is not impressive to us. It's not a real
job.
Now that the children of the movement are in their
20s, what
needs to be achieved?
To continue
my children and the children of the women's night,
the women who were active in the movement, their
children are going to have to become adults. The
progress of the night is very fragile with the
sub-churches who were in birth.
that
women
are not included in the Constitution, that
abortion rights is a matter that can be overturned
by the death of one more justice on the Supreme
Court, that America is a very
small
island in the world of stereotypical gender
roles. The children of women my age have got to
realize and
not take all of their rights as an individual for
granted in their lives. It's very fragile that it
could be reversed, that they're going to have to
revisit and revise some of these battles because
they're all shaky. The walls are shaky and they
couldn't have done it unless there is
So,
in that reason, I'm very delighted to see that you
are examining the issues and talking about the
reasons why the protection came down, some of the
solutions that have worked for the last two years,
where the cracks are and what the reasons are. Oh,
yes. You're going to have to do a lot of education of
young people your age. Sometimes. Well, and young
women too. I think it's been very easy for young
women to take for granted some of the privileges
that have been handed down without understanding
the history.
Just for the last question, what are some of your
favorite books? I'm glad we get to retake this
because I thought of maybe one of the first, The
Feminine Supreme, which was the story of my life
and very revealing to me. The book Her Story, which
is
The
Handmaid's Tale, which I think is a pseudo-time
fiction of what can happen. And all of the elements
of the Handmaid's Tale are in society right now. It
is not that far back to that time. That if we are not
digital, we are not digital. I think there's
magazines that have been post-war.
At
the same time, you can't just have a feminist base.
You need to have a good, sound, solid education.
That's what I would change about my life. I would
have gotten a Ph.D. in feminism. I would have
focused my intellectual inquiry earlier. I
wished
that I had higher educational opportunities when
I got into college. When I started college, I was
told by my husband's counselor that I should not go
to college, that I wasn't smart enough to finish,
and that the best I should hope for is to marry a rich
young man and become a housewife. My husband, who
was my husband, Second
thing I do is go to college and get a good degree and
sign up for a contract and delay getting married
until the end.
The guidance I had not received along the way. It
had to happen by hook or crook, and I was not... I was
a very traditional girl,
and I was married to a sweetheart. And so I was not a
rebel. without a cause when
I was young. I was a rebel with a cause when I was
better. And now, again, I'm very, very
respectful. Not the medical husband.
Well, I look
respectful. I'm 50, though. OK.